from Quora
How can I build mathematical maturity? What specific textbooks and exercise can I go over and over until I am able to independently learn math?

One builds mathematical maturity by studying rigorous mathematical proofs and by solving problems using rigorous mathematical arguments. Trying to make your own types of proofs that are different than standard proofs or typical ones often leads to creative output that accumulates with solid mathematical maturity.

Great Books to read to lead you to the ability to learn math independently:

    You must start with Walter Rudin’s Principles of Mathematical Analysis (baby Rudin) and then proceed to his Real & Complex Analysis (papa Rudin). I would try to solve at least 50% of the exercises in each. Go for the tough exercises and the ones that seem fun (they just catch your attention for whatever reason). After these two books, you will be nearing maturity. If you want to go further here: Stein has Singular Integrals and Differentiation Properties of Functions, Rudin has Functional Analysis, Evans has Partial Differential Equations, and Brezis has Functional Analysis, Sobolev Spaces and PDE. For the real advanced stuff in analysis, my old professor (Djrabashian) speaks highly of Lars Hörmander is the man. For numerical methods in analysis, try: Ascher’s Computer Methods for ODE, Bau’s Numerical Linear Algebra, and Golub’s Matrix Computations.
    Munkre’s Topology (point-set) is a very digestible book that requires almost no prerequistes being essentially self contained. This book will help you develop images for abstractions of analysis. A natural follow up book is Algebraic Topology by Hatcher. I haven’t gone through that one completely, but it is fun and again helps one develop useful and genuine maturity with abstract mathematics as this leads one to an area of pure mathematics that is continually finding amazing applications in and outside of mathematics. Hatcher has parts of a book for advanced topics in Spectral Sequences.
    For Abstract Algebra, the famous book is Dummit and Foote. I can say that that book has countless examples to help develop a tangible ideas of concepts that can often become more abstract, and less related to analysis, than Topology. Abstract Algebra is indispensable for mathematical maturity, though. It finds fundamentally important applications in modern geometry, number theory, and mathematical physics (soon, surely, even some powerful applications in CS). I have yet to study graduate level algebra, however Lang has a highly esteemed Springer book, whose only concern I might have is that it doesn’t touch on Commutative Algebra which is important for Algebraic Geometry.

Those are the three big pure areas of mathematics that can give one the maturity needed to study more advanced topics in mathematics. Such as:

    Geometry: Differential Geometry is a natural place to start, use Calculus on Manifolds by Spivak which rigorizes calculus/analysis to fit different geometric objects. Follow that up with Differential Geometry (book 1…) by Spivak which will use lots of algebra and topology. Again, it is important to solve problems here and one can even find Solution Manuals on ScribD or somewhere on google that will be vital in continuing to build mathematical maturity. Harthorne has the classic for Algebraic Geometry but I would read up on Commutative Algebra first, and check out one of the books below. A good geometric transition between Differential Geometry to Algebraic Geometry is Miranda’s Algebraic Curves and Reimann Surfaces, another is Bott & Tu, “Differential Forms in Algebraic Topology”.
    Number Theory: Davenport’s Multiplicative Number Theory is good classical introduction to analytic number theory covering Dirichlet’s arithmetic progressions of primes. For the algebraic stuff that still touches modular forms, I’d recommend Koblitz Elliptic Curves and Modular Forms (this book is good to read before Harthorne’s Alg Geom). Murty has Problems in Analytic Number theory which has hundreds of problems and solutions in the book.

Geometry and Number Theory are the two basic languages of mathematics. The former three are used more as tools to study the most fundamental, difficult, yet basic, problems in Geom and N Theory.

Read rigorous math books and solve their problems. That is the key. A fun basic problem is to rigorously construct the real numbers from the rational numbers, dedikand cuts or other forms of completions (try to solve that problem after reading a little analysis).

A less pure sided look into mathematics leads to numerical analysis methods like books described in first number 1 revolving around analysis. Moreover, Analysis climax in Measure Theory turns into Probability Theory. Durrett has great intro to advanced Probability. Liggett has a natural follow up in Continuous Time Markov Processes. And I haven’t read Shreve Brownian Motion and Stochatic Calculus but it is surely a sign of mathematical maturity. Ferguson’s A Course in Large Sample Theory is great advanced stats book that can lead one to Machine Learning, Kevin Murphy’s book being a great follow up to Ferguson’s.

Please, just start with Baby Rudin. That is how one begins to develop maturity. And do at least half the exercises, looking up solutions if you get stuck! The important thing is to understand method of solutions, not be the first to conjure a particular method.


How do I teach myself advanced mathematics?

I agree with Gilles Castel when he says teach yourself from lectures , becoz advanced Mathematics is built on abstractions and most of the textbooks do not explain the motivation behind those abstract ideas which makes these books nothing but dead words. On the contrary a good lecturer brings those abstract ideas to life which makes the beauty of Mathematics evident.

What I don't agree upon is that lectures from MIT are great. I believe they are overrated. If you are looking for some real quality learning , make use of NPTEL (National Programme on Technologically Enhanced Learning) initiated by Indian Institute of Technologies and Indian Institute of Sciences funded by the Govn of India . The quality and quantity exceed MIT and other Top Schools, and you actually learn from professors who could have otherwise led a life of comfort and affluence in US teaching in any of the top schools but choose to stay in India for the sheer passion for Teaching ..

I have yet to see online lectures of the top schools on some really fundamental subjects of mathematics like Real Analysis, Topology, Complex Analysis, Functional Analysis , Measure Theory, Optimization , Dynamical Systems and Chaos, Theory of Differential Equations and the list goes on and on , and all of it is available on NPTEL and not just from one professor but at least 2 or 3 professors so that you have a choice .

Note that I have mentioned only Math here , for Engineering and Physics as well NPTEL is the place to do some serious learning ,, however if you are looking for some overrated cool stuff, then this is not the place .